# Getting-and-Cleaning-Data-Course-Project

This code book describe in detail each variable that my implementation of run_analysis.R calculates.

The raw data is the Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset Version 1.0, developed by Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto and Xavier Parra.

The original documentation of the Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset Version 1.0 says that the experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers and that each one of them performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, it was captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

it follows below a list of all variable contained in the df_tidy.txt that is generated by my implementation of run_analysis.R when the files of the Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset Version 1.0 are unzipped in the R working directory:

1. "activity_label" - One of six activities performed by the 30 volunteers of the Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones experiment while wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. it can take the values WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING and LAYING.

2. "subject" - A number from 1 to 30 corresponding to each volunteer of the experiment.
"tBodyAcc-mean()-X".

3. Each of the following variables are provided as an average value per activity and per subject:

 "tBodyAcc-mean()-Y"           "tBodyAcc-mean()-Z"           "tGravityAcc-mean()-X"       
 "tGravityAcc-mean()-Y"        "tGravityAcc-mean()-Z"        "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-X"      
 "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y"       "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z"       "tBodyGyro-mean()-X"         
 "tBodyGyro-mean()-Y"          "tBodyGyro-mean()-Z"          "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-X"     
 "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Y"      "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Z"      "tBodyAccMag-mean()"         
 "tGravityAccMag-mean()"       "tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()"      "tBodyGyroMag-mean()"        
 "tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()"     "fBodyAcc-mean()-X"           "fBodyAcc-mean()-Y"          
 "fBodyAcc-mean()-Z"           "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-X"       "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y"      
 "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z"       "fBodyGyro-mean()-X"          "fBodyGyro-mean()-Y"         
 "fBodyGyro-mean()-Z"          "fBodyAccMag-mean()"          "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-mean()" 
 "fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean()"     "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()" "tBodyAcc-std()-X"           
 "tBodyAcc-std()-Y"            "tBodyAcc-std()-Z"            "tGravityAcc-std()-X"        
 "tGravityAcc-std()-Y"         "tGravityAcc-std()-Z"         "tBodyAccJerk-std()-X"       
 "tBodyAccJerk-std()-Y"        "tBodyAccJerk-std()-Z"        "tBodyGyro-std()-X"          
 "tBodyGyro-std()-Y"           "tBodyGyro-std()-Z"           "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-X"      
 "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Y"       "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Z"       "tBodyAccMag-std()"          
 "tGravityAccMag-std()"        "tBodyAccJerkMag-std()"       "tBodyGyroMag-std()"         
 "tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()"      "fBodyAcc-std()-X"            "fBodyAcc-std()-Y"           
 "fBodyAcc-std()-Z"            "fBodyAccJerk-std()-X"        "fBodyAccJerk-std()-Y"       
 "fBodyAccJerk-std()-Z"        "fBodyGyro-std()-X"           "fBodyGyro-std()-Y"          
 "fBodyGyro-std()-Z"           "fBodyAccMag-std()"           "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-std()"  
 "fBodyBodyGyroMag-std()"      "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-std()"
 
 The features from the original raw data come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. 
 
 Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 
 
 Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 
 
 Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). The signals were used to estimate mean - mean() - and standard deviation - std() - variables of the feature vector for each pattern: '-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.
